There’s no doubt
that Jesus was the Great Teacher,
and there were many reasons for that.
But one of them is
that he really understood
the people that he was dealing with.
He knew what was really inside.
Now, he had God-given ability
to actually read hearts.
But he also had abilities
that he got from his Father as well
—such as insight, discernment,
understanding, wisdom.
And all of this combined
to make him an outstanding teacher.
Well, obviously, we can’t read hearts,
but we can imitate Jesus
in developing the qualities
that will help us
to be the most effective
in helping others.
For example, insight:
How would you define it?
It’s the ability to see into a situation,
to act with discretion, to be successful.
It means
not just looking at the obvious
but going deeper.
It’s related to understanding.
Understanding is the ability
to distinguish different components
of a subject or a situation,
but insight goes further.
It’s an intelligent knowledge
of the reason.
In other words,
it answers the question, Why?
Why is this happening?
Or why would I say
what I’m about to say
because that’s the best thing to say?
It’s also related to discernment
—that’s being keen in judgment,
perceiving differences,
being able to see
what appears to be one way
but may not be that way at all.
And it helps to identify the true needs
of a person or the real problem.
Now, to illustrate how the use
of these qualities can be very helpful,
suppose someone in the congregation
comes to you and says:
“I’m really having a problem
controlling my temper.
I’m getting angry.”
So now, right away
we may think (and rightfully so),
‘Well, I have a number of scriptures
that I can share with you
about controlling anger,
controlling the tongue,
not letting any bad thing
come out of our mouth.’
Those are excellent.
But the teacher
or the helpful counselor
that will do the best good
would want to do what?
He’d want to ask the question, Why?
Why are you getting angry?
Can you pinpoint it?
Are you feeling well?
Have you not gotten enough rest?
Is there a catalyst at work, at school,
in the congregation, at home?
And then after determining why,
the most effective scriptures
and the most encouragement can be given.
And where do we get these qualities
of insight, discernment,
and understanding?
Well, they come
from Jehovah, don’t they?
Psalm 32:8 says:
“I will give you insight
and instruct you
in the way you should go.”
And he does that through his Word
but also through his organization.
Jeremiah 3:15 says:
“And I will give you shepherds
after my own heart,
and they will feed you
with knowledge and insight.”
So we’re blessed
to have Jehovah’s Word
and “the faithful and discreet slave”
to assist us to gain these qualities.
And how will it help us?
Open your Bibles, please, to Psalm 119,
and let’s read together verse 99.
Psalm 119:99:
“I have more insight
than all my teachers,
because I ponder over your reminders.”
Notice the psalmist did not say,
‘I can quote more scriptures
than anybody else,
and I can answer
all the difficult Bible questions—no problem.’
No, in this context he says:
“I have more insight.”
‘Jehovah has given me the ability
‘to see beyond the obvious in myself
and also in my ability
to help someone else.’
Well, how do we learn to display this?
Well, we go back
to our exemplar Jesus,
and we start
with his approach to people
—warm, kind, affectionate,
compassionate, empathetic.
And when a person
conveys that spirit
to those that he is trying to help,
they feel comfortable
and they are more likely
to reveal what may be in their heart.
So with that fine approach,
Jesus was able to put himself
into others’ situations
—to have empathy and compassion—
for example, with Martha and Mary
at the time of Lazarus’ death.
So we can appreciate, can’t we,
that that is a critical element
of being insightful,
making others feel comfortable?
But then, what else can we do
to find out what’s really
in a person’s heart?
We can’t read it.
Well, let’s open our Bibles
to the book of Proverbs chapter 20.
Proverbs chapter 20,
and let’s look at verse 5:
“The thoughts
of a man’s heart are like deep waters,
but the discerning man draws them out.”
So how does he do that?
By questions.
He seeks knowledge;
he gathers facts
in line with Proverbs 15:14,
where it talks about the wise one,
the understanding one,
“seeks knowledge.”
So he doesn’t answer
before he has all the facts.
And he uses tactful
and respectful questions,
but he doesn’t probe
to the point
of embarrassment unnecessarily.
And he realizes
that point-blank questions, blunt questions,
may give him an answer
but they can be very harmful
—especially if they insinuate
a suspicion of wrongdoing
without any warranting of that.
Such questions
may cause deep wounds
as described at Proverbs 12:18:
“Thoughtless speech
is like the stabs of a sword.”
So ask respectful, gentle,
meaningful questions,
and then listen.
‘Be swift about listening,
slow about speaking,’
according to James,
and not overreacting
to what they may say.
We have, in effect, asked them:
‘Please tell us,
how do you feel about this?
Or, what’s happening?’
And if they tell us,
we can’t get mad at them,
because we asked them.
So there’s a time to be quiet.
We ask a meaningful, tactful question
and Ecclesiastes 3:7 applies:
“A time to be silent
and a time to speak.”
Now, not talking too much
helps us in another way
because Proverbs 10:19 says:
“When words are many,
transgression cannot be avoided,
but whoever controls
his lips acts discreetly.”
So there’s this matter
of being cautious
with how much we talk,
especially before we have all the facts.
We want the complete picture
(with thoughtful questions),
and then we will be able to assist.
And if they say something,
we want to be careful
that we don’t overreact.
It’s insightful,
and it shows discernment
not to overreact.
Here’s an illustration of that:
A Christian couple noticed
that their daughter
was withdrawing
from family association.
She would isolate herself
and want to be by herself.
So they gently questioned her,
trying to find out what was happening.
She would never open up.
They kept it up—kindly, patiently.
And one day, the mother
went into the daughter’s bedroom,
sat down,
put her arm around her daughter,
and said,
“Honey, tell me, what’s happening?”
So she said:
“Well, Mom, I don’t feel like you
“and the rest of the family
like my company.
So I’m staying away as much as possible.”
So now the mother’s first reaction
as she reported,
the mother said:
“I wanted to say,
“‘That is absolutely ridiculous!’
But then I held it in,” she said,
and I listened,
and she poured out her heart.”
She got better.
The family
made some adjustments and, in time,
this fine young woman
went into the full-time service.
But let’s think back.
What if the mother
had not used discernment and insight
when her daughter told her
what the problem was
and she did say, “That’s ridiculous?”
What would that have done
to the daughter?
‘Oh, now you think I’m stupid,
‘and I’m ridiculous.
‘Well, that really helps a lot.
Thank you very much.
I feel even more willing
to be with you folks now.’
Well, it could have happened
that way, perhaps.
But it does show the value
of listening and not overreacting
to get really what’s in a person’s heart.
And when they tell us,
we respond accordingly.
So in imitation of Christ,
we want to know what’s inside people
so that we can help them the most.
But we do that by relying on the insight
and discernment that Jehovah gives us
and by being compassionate
and caring and kind
and probing gently
to find out what the real problem is
so that we can use
the most effective scriptures
to help them for that particular problem.